
# 8. Bonus - Some more Grammar

### Combining words

In German, you can always combine words to make a new word. The root word at the end of the compound determines the gender and number of the new word.

- Ex. Bücherregal (regal=shelf/rack)
- Ex, die Bücher + **das** regal = das Bücherregal

### **Moods**:

German has three moods:

- **Indicative**: States facts and expresses real events.
- **Imperative**: Issues commands or requests.
- **Subjunctive (Konjunktiv)**: Expresses hypothetical situations, politeness, or indirect

### **Aspects**:

German verbs have simple and compound aspects:

- **Simple Aspect**: Describes actions without focusing on completion.
- **Compound Aspect**: Uses auxiliary verbs (haben/sein) and the past participle to emphasize completion.

### **Infinitive clause:**

An infinitive clause in German grammar is a construction where an infinitive verb is used along with another verb to express a purpose, an action that follows the main action, or the subject's intention.

Infinitive clauses are commonly used to add more information to a sentence without using a full subordinate clause.

Ex. Purpose - "Ich gehe zum Supermarkt, um einzukaufen” ((I'm going to the supermarket to shop.)

Ex. Action - “Er kam nach Hause und begann sofort zu arbeiten." (He came home and immediately started working.)

Ex. Intentional - "Ich kann heute nicht kommen, um mich auszuruhen.” ((I can't come today to rest.)

### **Imperatives**

The imperative is used to express a wish, request or order. This form is used, for example, to explain to someone how to get to a particular place.

**Formal imperative** - If you address the person with Sie, you use the formal imperative.

- The formal imperative is created by putting the conjugated verb in first position, before the personal pronoun.
    - Ex. - Gehen Sie rechts.
    - Ex. - Legen Sie den Käse auf die Pizza.
- The verb sein is irregular in the imperative:
    - Statement: Sie sind pünktlich.
    - Imperative sentence: Seien Sie pünktlich.

**Informal imperatives -** We often use the imperative to give tips or make suggestions. An imperative verb comes at the beginning of the sentence. Singular: Rauch nicht! Plural: Raucht nicht! _**As you can see, we don't use "du" and "ihr" in the imperative.**_

- In the singular, the imperative is usually formed with the verb stem of the second-person singular. The ending "-st" is dropped. du rauchst → Rauch! du nimmst → Nimm!
- In the plural, the imperative takes the same form as the second-person plural. ihr raucht → Raucht! ihr nehmt → Nehmt!

**Misc.**

- In written instructions, e.g. recipes or operating instructions, the infinitive is sometimes used. In this case, we leave out the subject. The verb in the infinitive comes at the end of the sentence.
    - Den Käse in Würfel schneiden.
    - Den Käse auf die Pizza legen.
    - Die Pizza in den Ofen schieben.